GATHER FACTS:

What should be reported? 


All incidents, near-missed incidents and threats aimed at the NGO.


How?   

Immediate verbal report, to be given  as soon as you are no longer in danger to protect others from a similar threat, to obtain appropriate assistance and to inform decision-makers. Verbal report consists of: where – who – what – when. Specify if immediate assistance is needed.   
Written report within 24 hours (or as per the organisation’s procedures) of the incident, produced by the impacted person or the safety advisor of the impacted team. Essential to formally circulate information (partners, headquarters, local security forces where appropriate) and to keep record. 
Team debriefing will of course provide more details.   
Eyewitnesses may be very helpful, if any. 
Whom are the reports addressed to? 

To the Base/Country Safety & Security Manager.  
The Country Director decides on the level of external communication of Security Incident Reports.  
Additional instructions   

Be precise and neutral in gathering the facts.    
Store the reports together and create a table summarising incidents to analyse trends.

ANALYZE THE INCIDENT:

When an incident occurs, you must understand it and analyse it before restarting regular operations. 


Be realistic in your expectations. You may not be able to obtain clear or dependable answers to all your questions. It may take time to get clarity on some elements and some uncertainty is likely to remain.


Analyse the cause of the incident to understand motivations:  

Who caused the incident? 
What were the assailants’ interests/ motivations?
Was your organisation targeted? 
Was your organisation in the wrong place at the wrong time?   
Why did it happen?
Analyse the operating procedures of the incident: 

Compare them to incidents already occurred in the area to update context analysis.
Is there anything specific in this incident?
Was it clearly targeted on your organisation? On an individual?
Does it signal a change in the security environment or your acceptance?
Understand the chain of events:

Question internal conduct to learn and improve: verify if existing safety rules were adapted, if they were applied, examine staff reactions to identify points to be improved, examine if means were sufficient.
Question the role of local stakeholders before, during and just after the incident.

REVIEW, MAKE THE RIGHT DECISIONS AND TAKE ACTION:

Depending on the context, you can involve local authorities and measure their commitment to help. 
You may also have to question your acceptance and implement action to improve it.    
Update your security rules and procedures if necessary, share lessons learned and brief staff on changes.
Define and implement the conditions for resuming programs if suspended.
Share your analysis and questions with INSO and other NGOs.


